# M1 Overview

M1 is a sovereign chain that enables full multi-asset privacy for all connected
assets. In order to make M1 a reality, we not only need a name but we also need
a lot of features besides the ZKP circuits. Over time the set of supported
features my be extended to include things like fully programmable VPs and more
advanced circuits.

## Raison d'être

True multi-asset privacy doesn't exist at the moment anywhere. Up until now you
had the choice to build a sovereign chain that reissues assets (ie ZCash) or to
build a privacy preserving solution on existing chains (ie Tornado Cash on
Ethereum). Both have large trade-offs; in the former case users don't have
assets that they actually want to use and in the latter case users leak a ton of
metadata, it's expensive and clunky to use.

In 2022 the timing is right to launch M1, because interoperability in the form 
of IBC is starting to work in practice and that we are ready tech-wise in order
to launch something like M1.

Moreover M1 also presents a very good stepping stone to launch before mainnet
Anoma as the first chain in the Anoma ecosystem. It is expected that M1 is long
lived and supports actual assets and real value after launch; or in other words,
it's a full-fledged public blockchain.

## Proposed Features

### Cryptography

* [Multi-asset shielded pool circuit](m1/masp.md)
  * Support arbitrary assets
* [Trusted setup for the circuit](m1/masp/trusted-setup.md)
  * Secure and publicly accepted setup (with more than 100 participants)

### Base Ledger

* [Proof of Stake](m1/proof-of-stake.md)
  * Validators can stake assets
  * Delegators can delegate assets to validators
  * Creation of a community pool that is spendable by governance
* [Governance](m1/governance.md)
  * Validators can vote and delegators can override their validators vote
  * Election of a technical committee that can propose and review community
    funding
* [Gas/Fee system](m1/fee-system.md)
  * Transactions can't spam the network
* [Execution system](m1/execution-system.md)
  * VPs with initial whitelisting

### Bridges

* Bridge to IBC chains (Osmosis, Cosmos, E-Money, Terra)
* [Bridge to Ethereum](m1/ethereum-bridge.md)
* All bridges need to be thoroughly tested and running on internal testnets

### Front-ends

* Multi-chain/Multi-asset wallet that supports moving assets across bridges
  * Enables ETH to be moved to M1 and back
  * Supports staking and governance on M1
  * Enables multi-asset transfers involving the MASP
  * Integrates with existing key solutions (Ledger, Metamask, Keplr)
  * Supports whatever incentives schemes we want to have

* Block explorer
  * Display PoS state
  * Display governance state
  * Display transparent transfers
  * Display transfers in and out of the MASP
  * Display total values for the MASP
  * Allows tx hashes of shielded transfers to be looked up for confirmation

### Testnets

* Private testnets
  * Just us
* Internal testnets
  * Small select group of people
* Public testnets
  * Anyone that wants to join
* Incentivized testnets

### Integrations

* Indexer for M1 to integrate with block explorers
* Validator tooling
* Stakeholder support
  * Rosetta integration
  * Datahub integration
* WalletConnect integration
* Ledger integration

### Standards

* Token standard
* NFT standard

## Proposed Timeline

I'm proposing an aggressive timeline, because we have to acknowledge that if we 
ship M1 in 2023, then it's too late. The goal is to publically launch M1 in
summer 2022, around August.

The major milestones that we can focus around are the testnets and other things,
such as UIs and Trusted Setups can be timelined based on the testnets.

* Private testnets
  * End of February
  * Things can still be janky but we should have a working chain on which we can
    test the majority of functionality
* Internal testnets
  * End of March
  * Friends and family can start running our testnets
  * We are starting to have the first UIs that are working and Ledger apps are
    in testing
* Public testnets
  * End of April
  * The software is stable enough and we have enough documentation that 
    strangers on the internet can run it
  * Trusted setup should be done.
* Incentivized testnets
  * End of May
  * The incentivized testnets can run for the next 2 months while the last 
    remaining bits are polished. Participants receive tokens and we are spending
    those 2 months gearing up for launch.
